.TH NEO 6 "Oct 7 2022" "neo version 0.6.1" "neo User Manual"
.SH "NAME"
neo \- simulate the digital rain from "The Matrix"
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
\fBneo\fR [\fI\,OPTIONS\/\fR]...
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
\fBneo\fR recreates the digital rain effect from "The Matrix". Streams of
random characters will endlessly scroll down your terminal screen. There are
many differing depictions of this effect throughout the Matrix franchise.
\fBneo\fR attempts to closely mimic the scene from "The Matrix" where Cypher
explains the code to Neo. It imitates some of the finer details such as
the characters used (half-width katakana), uneven colors, color palette,
glitching, and flickering.
.PP
The digital rain is made of many "droplets". Each droplet scrolls vertically
down a column. There can be multiple droplets in each column. Some characters
on the screen are "glitched" - their values will change randomly until they
are erased. The bottom of each droplet is a bit brighter than the rest.
.PP
You can run \fBneo\fR without any arguments, but it has many options to
customize it to your liking. It can also respond to key presses (try
pressing a number!), and it accepts a color file (see the "COLOR FILE" section
below), which allows \fBneo\fR to display user-defined colors. \fBneo\fR will
use Unicode characters by default if it detects a locale that supports UTF.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.PP
\fBneo\fR takes options in two forms: short and long. Short options cannot
include an equal sign but long options can. Example for \-S/\-\-speed:
.RS
.PP
These will work:
.RS
.PP
-S 16
.br
--speed 16
.br
--speed=16
.RE
.PP
These will not:
.RS
.PP
-S=16
.br
--S 16
.RE
.RE
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-async\fR
Makes each column of characters scroll at an independent speed. Each column's
speed is still limited by the \fB\-S\fR/\fB\-\-speed\fR arg. All droplets in a
column will always scroll at the speed.
.TP
\fB\-b\fR, \fB\-\-bold\fR=\fINUM\fR
Controls if and how neo displays bold characters.
0=off, 1=random (default), 2=all.
.TP
\fB\-C\fR, \fB\-\-colorfile\fR=\fIFILE\fR
Read the colors from a file. This option is mutually exclusive with the
\fB\-c\fR/\fB\-\-color\fR and \fB\-\-colormode=0\fR options. See the
"COLOR FILE" section below for more info.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-color\fR=\fICOLOR\fR
Sets the foreground text color. This option is mutually exclusive with the
\fB\-C\fR/\fB\-\-colorfile\fR and \fB\-\-colormode=0\fR options. The available
colors are: green, green2, green3, yellow, orange, red, blue, cyan, gold,
rainbow, purple, pink, pink2, vaporwave, and gray.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-defaultbg\fR
Use the default terminal background color. This option is mutually exclusive
with the \fB\-C\fR/\fB\-\-colorfile\fR and \fB\-\-colormode=0\fR options.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-density\fR=\fINUM\fR
Controls how many droplets will appear onscreen. NUM is a decimal number.
Its default value is 1.0. Values greater than 0.0 but less than 100.0 are
allowed. However, values in the range [0.25, 4.0] will probably look best.
.TP
\fB\-F\fR, \fB\-\-fullwidth\fR
Use two columns per character. This option is useful when displaying
characters that take two columns to display such as Greek and full-width
katakana.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-fps\fR=\fINUM\fR
Sets a frame rate target. By default, \fBneo\fR will run at 60Hz. \fBneo\fR
does not attempt to query the OS for any display info. So it can't match your
monitor's refresh rate by default unless it happens to be 60Hz. Lower frame
rates will reduce CPU usage and improve battery life on portable devices.
.TP
\fB\-G\fR, \fB\-\-glitchpct\fR=\fINUM\fR
Sets the percentage of characters onscreen that glitch. NUM is a decimal
number between 0.0 and 100.0 inclusive. The default value is 10.0 (i.e. 10%).
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-glitchms\fR=\fINUM1\fR,\fINUM2\fR
Controls how often the characters on screen glitch. A "glitch" refers to when
a character changes into another. Each glitch is accompanied by a flickering
of the character's color if colors are enabled. After each glitch, neo will
wait for some time before doing the next glitch. The time it waits is chosen
randomly to be between the two values provided (inclusive). NUM1 and NUM2 are
positive integers that represent milliseconds. Their default values are 300
and 400.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Shows the help message.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-lingerms\fR=\fINUM1\fR,\fINUM2\fR
Controls how long characters stay onscreen after they finish scrolling. For
each column, neo will pick a random value between NUM1 and NUM2 inclusive.
NUM1 and NUM2 are positive integers that represent milliseconds. The default
values are 1 and 3000.
.TP
\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-shadingmode\fR=\fINUM\fR
Controls how neo assigns color values to characters on the screen.
0=random (default), 1=gradient.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-message\fR=\fISTR\fR
Displays a message in the center of the screen. The message is gradually
uncovered as characters stream past it. This effect is similar to the title
reveal in the movies. The message should be surrounded with double quotes.
neo parses arguments using getopt_long(), which does not have Unicode support.
So, unfortunately, this argument only accepts simple ASCII text. The message
will not display well if you also use the \fB\-F\fR/\fB\-\-fullwidth\fR option.
To unveil the message faster, the following options may help:
.RS
.RS
.PP
\fBneo\fR -m "the message" --speed=12 --density=3 --lingerms=1,1 --rippct=0
.RE
.RE
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-profile\fR
Turns on the profiling mode. This mode functions as normal except it times
how long each frame takes and writes the values to a file called
"time_profile.txt" in the current working directory.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-rippct\fR=\fINUM\fR
Sets the percentage of droplets that stop scrolling before reaching the bottom
of the screen. NUM is a decimal number between 0.0 and 100.0 inclusive. The
default value is 33.0 (i.e. about a third).
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-speed\fR=\fINUM\fR
Controls how fast characters scroll down the screen. NUM is a decimal number
that sets the number of characters drawn per second. The default value is 8.0.
If \fB\-a\fR/\fB\-\-async\fR is used, this option sets an upper bound on the
value chosen for each droplet's speed.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-screensaver\fR
If this option is set, \fBneo\fR will exit on the first key press.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Displays the version, build date, copyright, and license.
.TP
\fB\-\-chars\fR=\fINUM1\fR,\fINUM2\fR
Tells \fBneo\fR to display Unicode characters between NUM1 and NUM2 inclusive.
NUM1 and NUM2 are Unicode code points in hexadecimal (e.g. 0x1F030). This
argument can be used multiple times. If \fB\-\-charset\fR is not used,
\fBneo\fR will only use the values provided by this option. If a charset is
also specified, \fBneo\fR will use both the charset and the characters
provided by this option.
.TP
\fB\-\-charset\fR=\fILANG\fR
Sets the charset that is used to draw characters onto the screen. It can be
combined with the \fB--chars\fR option. The supported charsets are: ascii,
extended, english, dec, decimal, digits, punc, bin, binary, hex, hexadecimal,
katakana, greek, cyrillic, arabic, hebrew, devanagari, braille, and runic.
.TP
\fB\-\-colormode\fR=\fINUM\fR
Sets the color mode. The accepted values are 0, 16, 32, and 256. 0 disables
color (i.e. mono). 16 selects 16 colors. 32 selects 32-bit color. 256 selects
256 colors.
.TP
\fB\-\-maxdpc\fR=\fINUM\fR
Sets the maximum number of droplets per column. The default value is 3.
.TP
\fB\-\-noglitch\fR
Disables character glitching.
.TP
\fB\-\-shortpct\fR=\fINUM\fR
Sets the percentage of shortened droplets. If a droplet is not shortened,
it will extend from the top of the screen to final line, which is often
the bottom of the screen but not always (see also: \fB\-r\fR/\fB\-\-rippct\fR).
NUM is a decimal number between 0.0 and 100.0 inclusive. The default value is
50.0 (i.e. 50%).
.SH "KEYS"
.PP
You can press keys while \fBneo\fR is running to control its behavior. The key
bindings cannot be changed without modifying the program code. Some keys
can be held to increase their effect (e.g. holding UP increases speed further).
.PP
Here are the available key controls:
.RS
.PP
\(aqSPACE' - clears the screen
.br
\(aqUP' - increases the scrolling speed
.br
\(aqDOWN' - decreases the scrolling speed
.br
\(aqRIGHT' - increases the number of characters that are glitchy
.br
\(aqLEFT' - decreases the number of characters that are glitchy
.br
\(aqTAB' - toggles the shading mode between random and gradient
.br
\(aqESC' - exits \fBneo\fR
.br
\(aq+' - increases the number of droplets onscreen
.br
\(aq\-' - decreases the number of droplets onscreen
.br
\(aqa' - toggles asynchronous droplet speed
.br
\(aqp' - pauses \fBneo\fR
.br
\(aqq' - exits \fBneo\fR
.br
\(aq1' - sets the color to green
.br
\(aq2' - sets the color to green2
.br
\(aq3' - sets the color to green3
.br
\(aq4' - sets the color to gold
.br
\(aq5' - sets the color to pink2
.br
\(aq6' - sets the color to red
.br
\(aq7' - sets the color to blue
.br
\(aq8' - sets the color to cyan
.br
\(aq9' - sets the color to purple
.br
\(aq0' - sets the color to gray
.br
\(aq!' - sets the color to rainbow
.br
\(aq@' - sets the color to yellow
.br
\(aq#' - sets the color to orange
.br
\(aq$' - sets the color to pink
.br
\(aq%' - sets the color to vaporwave
.RE
.SH "COLOR FILE"
.PP
\fBneo\fR can read a file that specifies the background color and all the
foreground colors. The file is given via the \fB\-C/\-\-colorfile\fR option.
.PP
You can write comments using "//", "#", ";", "*", or "@". Comments can go on
separate lines or after the data on any line. The first line that is not
blank or a comment \fIshould\fR be the version string. The version string line
should look like:
.RS
.PP
neo_color_version N
.RE
.PP
where "N" is the color file version number, which is currently 1.
The version string is optional, and if it is omitted, then \fBneo\fR will
assume that the file adheres to the latest version's format. This could
potentially break old color files. Ye have been warned! \fBneo\fR will try
to maintain backwards compatibility with older color file versions so long
as their version is actually given.
.PP
Each data line in the file describes a color. The first line is the background
color. Each subsequent line describes a foreground color. Each file must
contain at least two lines: one for the background and one for the
foreground. Typically, you will want to put the foreground colors in order of
ascending brightness. \fBneo\fR will not sort the colors. The last color should
usually be very bright (e.g. white).
.PP
Each data line in the file specifies one value or four values. If only one value
is given, it is treated as a 16 or 256 terminal color code (e.g. 16 is black).
If four values are given, the first is treated as a 16/256 color code and the
other three are the RGB components of the 32-bit color. Each component is a
value from 0 to 1000, which closely mimics how ncurses handles color. Each value
is separated by a comma, and whitespace is allowed.
.PP
If more than one value is given on a line, then all four values must be given.
Lines do not all have to have the same number of components i.e. some lines
can just specify the 16/256 color code while others can specify all four values.
.PP
On most systems, if a value of "-1" is provided for the 16/256 color code, this
will set the color to the system default. This can be useful if you want to
keep the default background.
.PP
All ncurses implementations should allow you to override at least the first 256
colors, assuming your terminal supports it. Some will let you override even
more than that. ncurses should restore all colors back to their previous state
as long as \fBneo\fR exits cleanly.
.PP
If either of the 16 or 256 colormode options is used, all 32-bit RGB
components in the color file will be parsed if they are given, but they will be
unused.
.PP
Example 1: Blue text on a red background using only 256 color codes
.RS
.PP
196
.br
21
.RE
.PP
Example 2: Different shades of purple text on a yellow background with some
32-bit color components
.RS
.PP
228,917,888,59
.br
54
.br
92
.br
129,750,963,128
.RE
.PP
Example 3: Default background and various shades of green using only 256 color codes
.RS
.PP
-1
.br
34
.br
40
.br
46
.br
82
.br
231
.RE
.SH "PERFORMANCE"
.PP
\fBneo\fR can have two main performance issues: high CPU utilization and
stuttering.  A terminal emulator with GPU acceleration (e.g. Alacritty) may
significantly improve these issues. The CPU utilization by \fBneo\fR itself
is fairly low, even at high frame rates on large screens. However, your
terminal emulator may use substantial CPU resources to draw everything.
Without a fast terminal emulator, this application may use up a whole CPU
core or three.
.PP
Sometimes the text will not scroll smoothly. Again, a fast terminal emulator
will probably help. You will also typically want the frame rate
(i.e. --fps) to be evenly divisible by the character speed (i.e. -S/--speed).
Sometimes, the glitching effect will lead to stuttering because a substantial
number of characters onscreen will have to be redrawn. Reducing the
glitchiness (i.e. --glitchpct) or disabling glitching (i.e. --noglitch) may
help.
.PP
If you experience performance issues, here are some things to try:
.RS
.PP
1. Use a GPU-accelerated terminal emulator
.br
2. Run \fBneo\fR on a smaller screen/window
.br
3. Reduce the frame rate (e.g. --fps=30)
.br
4. Reduce the number of droplets onscreen (e.g. -d 0.5)
.br
5. Reduce the character speed (e.g. --speed=6)
.br
6. Disabling glitching (i.e. --noglitch)
.br
7. Disable colors (i.e. --colormode=0)
.br
8. Disable bold characters (i.e. --bold=0)
.br
9. Disable Unicode characters (i.e. --charset=ascii)
.RE
.PP
Here is a "potato mode" config that should perform well on most systems:
.RS
.PP
\fBneo\fR --fps=20 -d 0.5 --speed=5 --noglitch --colormode=0 --bold=0 --charset=ascii
.RE
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.PP
Example 0: Just run it
.RS
.PP
\fBneo\fR
.RE
.PP
Example 1: Sets a faster, asynchronous scrolling speed with 256 colors
.RS
.PP
\fBneo\fR -S 12 -a --color=green3 --colormode=256
.RE
.PP
Example 2: Red text with a custom message and Cyrillic characters
.RS
.PP
\fBneo\fR --color=red --charset=cyrillic -m "IN SOVIET RUSSIA, COMPUTER PROGRAMS YOU!"
.RE
.PP
Example 3: Displays golden Greek characters that are full-width
.RS
.PP
\fBneo\fR --color=gold --charset=greek -F
.RE
.PP
Example 4: Uses \fB\-\-chars\fR to draw Unicode dominoes
.RS
.PP
\fBneo\fR --chars=0x1F030,0x1F093 --fullwidth
.RE
.SH "AUTHORS"
Written by Stewart Reive
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Create an issue on GitHub: https://github.com/st3w/neo
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright \[co] 2021-2022 Stewart Reive
.PP
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
.SH "DISCLAIMER"
This program is not affiliated with "The Matrix",
Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc., Village Roadshow Pictures, Silver Pictures,
nor any of their parent companies, subsidiaries, partners, or affiliates.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBlocale\fR(1), \fBlocalectl\fR(1)
.SH "AFTERWORD"
You get used to it. I... I don't even see the code.
All I see is blonde, brunette, redhead.
Hey! You uh... want a drink? :)
